Cardiff Carnival 25th Anniversary Project.
Interviewer Steve Fletcher.
Interviewee Stephanie Gowna.
The location is the Swicker office and today's date is the 1st of October 2015.
Stephanie, would you be kind enough to spell your name in full?
Thank you.
Okay.
G-A-W-N-E.
Thank you very much indeed.
Steph, how did you first get involved with Cardiff Carnival?
I first got involved with Cardiff Carnival probably a decade ago and it was being approached
for my belly dance group to join in the carnival which was then going down from Grangetown
up through to town.
Got it.
And the name of the group at that point, can you remember?
I don't know if we were the Persian Bells then, I've got a feeling we were just Stephanie's
belly dance group.
It did what it said on the tin.
Yeah, I remember.
I've always thought of you as the godmother of the burlesque scene in Wales and particularly
in Cardiff.
With your burly girl hat on, of course we got together to plan a fun carnival back in
2013 I think.
Yeah I think it was, if not 2012, it was one of those, I can't remember.
This is when you had the stages in town and I think we've had three years of stage, being
on the stages.
Immediately you said that, I thought one of the highlights of our working relationship
and it was the first time we got to work together with you on the carnival was to actually watch,
I think there were 23 of you, 23 wonderful dancers doing the can-can in the sunshine,
in the centre of Cardiff, in Queen Street and of course the traditional can-can, we
had the music, but it's that fantastic, what can I say, Apache war-whooping split at the
end.
I was thinking, well if Two Losers Trek was here now, the absence would be on him, putting
you on the spot, would you care to give us a can-can, what's that noise like as you
girls finally go hit the day?
Thank you very much, that was exactly it, in one.
Of course carnival, even the carnival, has had many different formats and many different
routes, the carnival camp has changed etc.
Back in 2012, no it was when we first started working again together, the idea was to broaden
carnival and bring in other groups and the rest of it and I can remember going the December
before, so it would be December 2011, to the Masonic Lodge and I haven't been to, I think
then you were the?
Burlesque Cardiff.
Burlesque Cardiff, so I went to see Burlesque Cardiff to see what it was all about, I'd
heard lots of good things, great night out, very very creative, very very humorous and
I went along and I just fell in love with you and your community group and I also saw
one thing there which I hadn't seen before and of course it was part of your crossover
between belly dancing and cabaret, was I saw my first ever pair of ISIS wings, would you
like to explain what an ISIS wing, where it comes from and what it looks like, because
even as we sit in the swicker office there's a whole bevy of them behind us in amazing
colours, so I hadn't seen one before and I just thought oh.
Yeah, yeah, well the ISIS wings, it's a belly dance prop, it doesn't actually have any historic
basis in belly dance, it's a completely modern prop that dancers use, it's a pleated, permanent
pleated cape which goes around the neck and it will open out to 360 degrees, so it will
make a complete circle, at least a decent one will make a complete circle or near enough,
so when you open the sides of the cape have got sticks in them, so when you lift the sticks
up you can make this big circle and you can make lovely shapes with your cape as you're
dancing.
Yeah, it was interesting because immediately I saw a point of contact with carnival and
one of my gurus, even to this day of creative carnival, is a man who revolutionised carnival
in Trinidad, a man called Peter Minchel who went on to do fabulous things, he reintroduced
the artist back into the Trinidad carnival, his group were part of not one but two Olympic
Games ceremony openings and his breakthrough movement was creating a costume called the
Hummingbird where you had those wings and you had the extension of them through the
hand and through the sticks and immediately I thought, oh my gosh that looks carnival-esque
for me and the fact that the Isis wings that you were performing with and which we have
adopted in a lot of our work were made in bright, shiny, scintillating colours which
really caught the light and were magical, so that was immediately one thing I was thinking
oh my goodness we've got to get some of those in the wonderful world of carnival, I think
originally we ended up importing some via a belly dance organiser in South Wales but
importing them from Egypt. Yeah that was through Sue, that was through Sue who calls herself
Sophina in Newport and she's married to an Egyptian. This is just how times have changed
because actually now you were just, I mean this was only a few years ago, whereas now
Isis wings you would just easily, easily buy them off the internet directly. Yes and in fact
that's ultimately what we do now. Yes well I think I certainly think that you and your group
were part of popularising them here in Wales because you know they were used them to such
good effect and it's that whole thing of carnival about how do you transform someone and make them
larger than life and a pair of Isis wings you know and the way they respond to movement it just
touched a chord in me immediately and I thought like oh these are these you know we've got a lot
in common with these people. Yeah we started, I taught a workshop for the carnival crew didn't I
for your dances and chapter when you first got your Isis wings just kind of showing them you know
what you could do what the what the limitations were and how to use them which is fun but the
actual routine that you saw me do in the burlesque show must have been my war of the worlds
which sounds like the whole you know which is a real steampunk number which is
miles away from from from you know carnival. I'm glad I made a leap. Yeah yeah you did make a real
leap because it was quite a tenuous one yeah yeah yeah great though. No I mean the other thing that
was quite obvious as I sat there in the Masonic Lodge in Cardiff equally was that here was a very
upbeat exciting group of people you know with you at the helm and perhaps we should come back to
your pivotal role a bit later but the the costumes and the props there was there was a
a crossover in terms of what can I say transforming dressing up with style and sass and pizzazz
and I was thinking oh you know here we are coming from we've recently sort of left behind us
our principal international influence of being Caribbean carnival and we were very interested
at that time in taking on more of a Latin American feel to our work so particularly with
Adrian Spinola becoming our artistic coordinator of the carnival camp here in Cardiff and elsewhere
and his interest in headdresses again with the internet making feathers and sequins and braid
much more cheaply I mean you know feathers used to be an incredible luxury for us and now
we can import them from China at a massively reduced cost I always think there must be a
lot of very bald pheasants in China. I don't like to think about the animal husband
feathers. Absolutely so having done that I know you and I chatted and in the the format
that we had for 2012 onwards where we we returned to the city centre we had these street stages
I mean your groups you had two groups of course you had your balesque group
also your Persian bells belly dance group and if I mentioned the time warp from
the Rocky Horror Picture Show this is another standout moment for me so on the one hand
we've got the first and probably only time that the cam can has been performed with such energy
yeah right in the centre of Cardiff I mean yes there was an audience but as you know people
gathered I mean there were people coming out of the Queen's Arcade shopping centre and just
completely yeah their jaws dropped and you know that can-can moment but another standout moment
for me was let's do the time warp again what's that what's that bring back in terms of yes
yeah that was that was a great idea so the time warp is we dance the time warp with the with my
burlesque treat with the cabaret girls and it comes out quite a lot Halloween events it comes out at
our sci-fi shows and putting together we always with the carnival we always have a little bit
of an issue trying to put together routines that don't involve any striptease which is and
obviously the time warp we do it as as in the Rocky Horror Picture Show film and we keep our
clothes on and it's and it was it was it was great we did doing that in the carnival I think
was just the year before last of 14 I think yeah yeah it was a real real crowd pleaser and and
people remember it you know to do routines where people know the music and they you know the
Rocky Horror Picture Show what are we in the was it 40 years ago it came out Richard O'Brien's got
a lot to answer for in a good way it's a part of a lot of people's you know childhood or
early years so people enjoy watching it and and it's it's it's it's quirky you know the costumes
are fun and it's accessible for people so no it went down really well absolutely I mentioned that
the the the headdresses and particularly those with a sort of Latin American samba feel with feathers
has it has been something that's a crossover that both our art forms have enjoyed and certainly
Swickr Carnival organized specifically for your group headdress making workshops I remember on a
Saturday morning popping in to return some bank keys I'd forgotten of course that there was another
sort of carnival workshop going on and this was the caged bra workshop I hadn't quite understood
what caged bra was until I opened the door would you care to elucidate yeah well we
we were going to do some work we did some other work with you which was going to be more carnival
more Rio style so I we had to do a swift learning curve I learned how to do a non-pay samba and
you know a basic samba and worked out a basic samba routine for for my performers who then needed
to be dressed and I think we did that in yeah we did that in one of the Burlesque art of shows and
when we did the same routine in the carnival so then the girls are looking at costumes and there's
all these amazing costumes on the internet yes they're seeing all the girls all the professional
dancers from Rio and the big carnivals and a lot of whom are wearing caged bras so it's like an
underwire so it's the underwire of your bra and so the underwire is kind of keeping the boobs
up and then you've got which is always good and then you have pattern within that the the cup
shape so it might be a flower or a star or or whatever pattern you've got all this is made with
wire which is then covered with tape and then embellished and decorated so it's an it's an
underwire I mean it could be as as naked or as covered as you wanted it to be but it's very much
a sort of a staple of the um of the traditional you know Brazilian sort of samba um carnival
and and what's great is is through doing that doing the workshops with the girls so I just and
I was actually teaching a samba work you know a weekly class for a while here in chapter
um I had um Mitzi come over from Bristol teach me and then I taught my my girls and and um and
found what I could on YouTube and stuff and taught you know for for for six months uh kind
of explored the whole sort of samba samba side of things what was nice was Mitzi then picked
off one of my dancers Gillian and Gillian you know works as a samba dancer for Mitzi where Mitzi needs
professional performers for her you know her the gigs she gets in restaurants or or whatever it
being so through us having the link together you know we brought that awareness of of the authentic
cabaret costumes to the I don't know 50 or whatever girls I was teaching at that time
some of which wanted to explore it further and came and did samba classes and actually learn a
proper to do the proper samba step and some of which went off and actually performed you know are
you know for want of a better word professional samba dancers with full costumes and and a little
costumes as well but they made themselves you know some of these samba costumes you see them on the
internet and they are amazing but we're looking at there's you know 400 500 quid with amazing
headdresses you know the g strings the the thong bottoms the underwire the cuffs and the headdress
you know and the the things on the shins as well but you know Gillian made all her own costume you
know a bit of help from swicker well a lot of help from swicker a lot of help madrian and a glue gun
and they're off as she's away and that's 500 saved and it's amazing what you do a little bit
gardening wire isn't it amazing when you do gardening wire and you know yeah it takes the
whole it takes people's experience of dance and where it's going to go where it will lead so we've
done every single every so many different styles for swicker everything from the time walk to the
can can to you know samba dances um yeah it's been great um obviously uh when you've been performing
with card of carnival which is very much a a family orientated as you say uh no striptease no
titillation i think it's safe to say that uh uh you know uh we were we were both in family friendly
mode oh definitely um burlesque in cardiff in wales um i always refer to you as the godmother
of the the welsh burlesque scene uh i i yes how did you get into it and and perhaps
yeah is it even now understood i mean uh what what kind of barriers have you met historically and
and do they exist now or whatever so um i got into burlesque as i was teaching a lot of belly
dance i i was uh living in turkey married to a turk and and got into belly dance that way
kate got divorced came back here did a lot of teaching and i was very popular at the time there
was no i think there was one other maybe sophina there was one other belly dance teacher in cardiff
so i was doing well i was picking up all the work all the professional dancing work very busy
classes um that started to pitter off a little bit the edge started to come off it as other
people started to come in and teach belly dance um and you know the the whole you know with the
internet things get uh people are seeing more and the whole thing has become slightly more diluted
at the same time um i met my partner robert um so that must have been about eight years ago from
now well my background before moving to turkey was um very much commercial theater so cabaret
floor shows pantomime summer seasons um musical my training was in musical theater um and i you know
when i was 19 i was working in floor shows in japan and china hong kong um i mean i was a i was
a topless dancer in in japan when i was 20 um i and then came back and do you know come back and
take a part in pantomime you know it was behind you behind you yeah exactly so it was is really
just coming from that jobbing background well it made perfect sense when there was this burlesque
revival for me to think well this is my background you know i've got the belly dance i've got the
bumps and grinds i've got the physicality um and then there's all this other stuff there's the
all this you know the the showgirl stuff the jazz dance the funky stuff that i've done
in my work as a commercial dancer um you know from the age of sort of 19 to sort of i suppose
27 when i moved to 28 so i have all that all those different um genres behind me so actually to
then go i didn't think about necessarily burlesque we were cabaret when i started the classes and i
think the first class i did was with my belly dance group and that was mine hair again which
has been a great staple that's come out we've done it at the carnival we've done all over the place
um and then from mine hair i i did a few choice i did a few solos um i did the mariontonette solo
i did little red riding herd i did just a few solos um as a burlesque performer but there was
burlesque there was the um in carnival before i started because i remember going to see um lady
lollipop and um johnny cage's ex-wife um at minskies when it was what the butler saw i don't know if
you ever went to any of those so there was there were i went to minskies i didn't catch that there
was a little bit of an underground burlesque movement but i think what i did was i kind of
um branded myself as burlesque cardiff which was a little bit like it was a big which is a good
thing to do and because my background has always been teaching i had this big band of ladies around
me coming to classes those people then became in the went into the shows and then through those
lessons we've had some amazing international performers have come through so we've had
the likes of sandy shaw who you know is all over the place we've got betty blue eyes who's a
fantastic international performer barry island who's my drag king we've got had katie von cupcakes
yee-hee sexton we've had a lot of again gillian who is is uh epic so she's you know bonita boudoir
she's going to be in the culture wars at my festival in november so it's it's created this
real um this real little sort of workhouse of performers and shows and you know the amount of
material that you know we've done over the last eight years with sort of i don't know how many
shows a year probably about five five or six different shows a year um always putting out
always pumping out new material yes i mean to some people but particularly those who well
exclusively those who actually haven't been to see what you do they in their minds i have some
kind of sleazy connotations whereas it seems to me quite plain and particularly you know when you
meet the group and then get a sense of who these women are what they're getting out of it and the
way they treat each other um don't put words in your mouth but yes where would you say it's
coming from you know faced with that criticism all that all that unfounded prejudice i mean i
think it is i think it's quite threatening for people when they're not involved in it and i
think when i i know talking talking to people who i think you know at the school gates who i think
are going to be you know um we have we have a friendship and i think that they're just about
this is the right time to tell them you have to judge the moment um but i am actually koo koo
labelle and i'm a international burlesque performer it it's it's people don't really want to
know they want to think oh that's stephanie that's meg's mum they don't want to think about you as a
striptease artist when they see what i do when they see me come in say as the butterfly in my
cocoon crawling along the floor i mean there's a lot of humor in your work and in the group's work
my work there's there's an awful lot of humor yes um and and i think burlesque it's it's not
striptease and it's not necessarily very even very sexy and i think this is what people have told me
when they've seen the shows in the nicest possible way no absolutely that's great fun but it's it's
not sexy because the girls are so in control so it's not like you're watching anything that's
particularly pornographic or anything like that unless you you know you might have a performer who
who has that sexuality but they're always dressed to a degree yeah and let's say there's no full
nudity there's no nudity you know we're we're by law not allowed to show any genitalia which
includes clues areola so there's no nipples on display there's no nothing on display the
costumes can get very very risque but it's all to do with the with the um the environment that
you're putting on the shows and how the shows and how the acts are set up um saying that you know we
have some brilliant soloists and we invite people to perform with us who are internationally known
and very very very high standard standard very high caliber of performers but the group that performs
um it's rare that everybody who comes to my class wants to do a full striptease and actually bear
all and the women i think get an awful lot of you know for me as a person it's made me a lot
more empowered and a lot more aware of my sexuality and women's sexuality as a whole um
and i think that's what they get out of it i think that's what the women get out of it who come to
the classes and and other professional performers i know are very um i don't want to buzz things
about um you know are amazingly sort of strong strong women no i i i as i say i mean one of the
things i like about the group is the group identity yeah the way they look after each other
as you say strong independent and but also a cohesive group um and and the last thing i
associate with you know yes anybody who's hoping for some kind of uh what can i say uh dark erotic
buzz is is it's far more likely to get yeah is it i don't associate burlesque and as you brought it
and made it popular in cardiff with salacious material far more with belly laughing and grinning
and and cheering at the people joining in and supporting there's there's nothing you know the
dirty macro brigade are never going to fight they're never going to get their kicks through
through this art form it's it's it's you know no it's it's far more loving and warm and and uh
yes and humorous i mean if anything it mocks sexuality in in in that sort of carnival fool
for a day type routine it turns things on its head it does and and actually burlesque means satire
so that's what it's meant meant to mean and it you know it it can be dark i mean i've got some sort
of you know like the my pris act yes tris is dark and she's very she's a very erotic figure
which is completely untouchable um so so it's just it's playing is playing with and it's
what i love about the burlesque and the cabaret um format is it's rather like a carnival passing
you you've got you know something's in front of you it's there for five minutes and then something
else is coming along so if you don't like that no there'd be something else but so is a feast for
the eye it's the creativity the costumes you know as you say i mean you come on in a
a morphed sleeping bag as a cocoon it's like what you know how is this gonna and then very very
cleverly you know it moves on and and and a show where performance is given and uh you only have
to listen to the cheering at the end to know that yeah message given and understood you know yeah
and i think when you're going back to the group and the cohesiveness of the group what what really
keeps the us all going after eight years is the friendships and the connections that arise in
that group and what's interesting as a teacher and somebody who's leading these this troop along
is to see relationships develop within the group and little supporting networks develop within the
groups that have coped with cancer and bereavement and divorce and all sorts of stuff within within
that group um and i think that's i feel mentally proud of them for making those connections and
for making their world a bit brighter and giving themselves coping mechanisms with each other
so it is a little bit a self-help help group but it works very well on all sides um stef thank you
so much for that interview um i am pleased to declare on behalf of carnival that you are now
officially a carnival hero uh i'm sure you're going to accept this verbal award on behalf of
yourself and the uh the broader group which we still like the nickname because uh uh the burley
girls yeah the burley girls the burley girls uh will always be close to our carnival hearts
thank you very much indeed